and then selected Jarvis Miller as president.
Were you still a commandant? I was in the police
department. I went to the police department in the
summer of 77. Okay, before Dr. Miller became
president. All right, describe how that change
came. Well, it didn't really affect me. Woodall
took over my job. But how were you selected as
president? John Coldis, he was having problems
with the police department because the police
chief over there was a good old guy, you know,
passed away and took the ringer and the son of the
other. But he had a couple of women employees ask
for jobs and he said, I got my quota of women and
things like that. And he needed somebody over
there that was a little more attuned to life today.
And so he asked me about taking on that job and that
position. And I said I wouldn't be very interested
in it, and so I just moved from one to the other. I
took military leave for my last 30 days and started
working for the university. And you reported
directly to Coldis. Right. Did he give you any
directions or guidance? One thing they wanted to
do was to try to improve the image of the police with
the students and the staff faculty. And there was
no way really that it could happen with the parking
situation the way it was. And that was the best
thing that ever happened as far as police was
concerned was separating it and having a traffic
and a police. That's really why I left. I had all of
it I could stomach. I was taken it home with me and
nothing I could do about it. And we really were
concerned, but you're personally blamed for it.
And, you know, that parking garage is there now. We
recommended that way, way back. And we did a
parking study that about half of the one that they
adopted, they included into that thing, and I'm
sure that company used what we'd spent time trying
to work out, about gates and all this other stuff.
Not near as sophisticated as this, but it was a
miserable job. When you took over as campus
security and traffic, how many professionals
were there in those units? The total commissioned
officers was 49 and we had 8 or 10
secretaries and we had 10 or 12 student workers.
Did you inherit any problems right off that you had
to? Oh yeah, I inherited the one on not hiring
another woman and, you know, we have equal
opportunities people and we got that
straightened out and we offered her a job and she
didn't want to come to the police department after
that but they got her a job on campus making more
money and we had, you know, we're always getting
threatened, we're going to sue you, this, that, or
the other and I paid for that parking spot and All
that stuff, so you spent most of the time doing
that. We had the wrong person dealing with
complaints. Maddox was not a very popular person,
and I don't know that he was treating people
fairly. Probably wasn't. And Bob White did the
right thing getting rid of him. And Russ McDonald,
I did the wrong thing making him police chief. I did
it because he was the finest sergeant major I ever
had, but he couldn't forget that he was sergeant
major. And he handled the police pretty much the
same way, and that's the wrong way. But he did some
good things too. And I might mention here
something you probably don't know, But the
program that the police have where if you want to
turn somebody in and get the money, what do you call
it? I forget the number. We don't want your name. We
just want your information. It started with Rush
McDonald for the state of Texas. He went to New
Mexico to represent the police department in a
police meeting and New Mexico had used that system
and he came back with it and they were all excited
about it and I said, well, go to work on it and see
what you can do. And we got together with the
college station in Brown and set one up and we
provided an officer full time to answer the phone
And he got the community to support the money and
then he carried it before the Texas people and the
police business and they got adopted. So we were
the people in the state of Texas for that program.
Now, when you took over, the headquarters was
where the development foundation building is
now. Right. And in terms of the hour demands on your
time, How did that job compare with Commandant?
Well, I pretty well went home at 5 o'clock, but my
phone rang after that, and it was not a fun job, so I
went home with my problems. Were there any high
moments, pleasant moments? Well, most of the
people were good people to work with and we'd go
over there and visit them every time we'd come down
here. We were really pleased with them and a lot of
them are still around here. But I didn't, not very
many people ever said thank you. And there was
nothing like the joy of seeing the Corps march by.
That's right. It's just a totally different
environment. And I had to be over there at the
football games because most of the people were
there. And the traffic, people fussed about it
there. And I was still going to midnight yell
practice because I was still in under the, had the,
you know, leaders under my advisory capacity. And
those sort of things were a pretty full day. But,
and it just wasn't the same feeling. I wouldn't
have, I wouldn't have stayed much longer in the
River Coast. Now you did that for how many years?
until I was 83. 83, so six years. Dr. Miller, as
president, what were your relations with him? Not
much. I had very little to learn. And so you
reported directly to Coldus? Until about a year or
so before I left, and they turned it over to
Charcala,
which I didn't like. I don't mean it. I didn't like
him. I liked being around Dr. Coles. I don't blame
him. I'd have shed a stir if I could have. When he had
a staff meeting, did you meet with the other people
that reported to him? Anytime Dr. Coles had a
meeting, we all met. Give this description a
sample of the kinds of problems, big and small,
that campus security had to deal with. Well, the
big problem, of course, again, was the traffic
problem. The police hated it. And they were all
commissioned policemen. They didn't think it was
their job. And they were writing their tickets and
listening to the hassle. And really, it was a real
hassle. As far as security of the university was
concerned, there weren't many problems. We'd had
a few break-ins and damages here and there. very
rare, once in a while there was a bomb threat, but
not more than half a dozen times during my tenure.
We just, mostly it was the animosity towards us
that made it a different job to have. And it was
really not fair, but I can understand it. And like
when I come to camp, I don't have any place to park.
I'd go pay for it. The police at that time weren't
paying for a parking permit. I said, no way. If
everybody else on campus is paying, you're going
to pay if you want to bring your car in here to work.
That caused a hassle. They had one of the sergeants
that was afraid He wouldn't work at night because
he was afraid of the dark, I guess, or something.
And we put him on shift. If you don't like the shift,
out you go. And he said, well, you know, I can be on
the day shift and the other one. I said, well,
shifts are going to be rotated every month. And if
somebody wants a swap shift, as long as the chief
agrees, that's all right. But, oh, and also Chief
Luther, well, Luther, wouldn't put women on duty
at night. And I said, why not? They're police
officers and they wanted to. And so we put women on
duty. I mean, if they're going to be a policeman,
they're going to be a policeman. So, you know,
there was, there were a lot of little things like
that that were going on in there. You know, you got
to treat everybody what the job demands. Now we,
during your years, we didn't have any major
problem like murders. Well, we had, you know, one
person was killed over in the chapel, one student,
but they knew who it was. No major fires other than
the board room that I know of, or the board house.
But that was an accident. Right. We had a couple of
of reported rapes and that we were able to show that
there was not a rape. Once in a while, a fight would
break out and I could go take care of it. No weapons
problems. We had a lot of drug problems. And what
drugs primarily was it? Oh, mostly marijuana,
although once in a while you'd have a heroin. And
the marijuana, I didn't know what marijuana
smelled like, you know. But I, when I went through
the police academy, that's one of the things you
got to, experience and I smoked a marijuana
cigarette to experience what the smell was. I
didn't get any effect from it, I don't know, but
anyway, that sort of stuff. As far as y'all were
aware, where was the marijuana coming from? What
was the source? I don't know. I don't know where it
was, why it was. Don't know who the... And any
heroin, cocaine, any I don't know of any ties with
the drug, but Bob White probably, he might have
known some of those things because he was in that
business. Well, and I'll bet it's a lot worse now
than it was then. Do you remember any goofy, funny,
silly things that y'all coped with? Not really. I
know it's not really funny because it's sad, but my
youngest son got hooked on drugs, and he was a
student and married. They brought him in one night
and called me at home about 2 o'clock in the
morning. I came over there, and he was still pretty
high on whatever he was on. And he starts cussing
me, and I told him, you're not going to ever say that
to me again. And he did it again. There was a
policeman there with me, and I hauled off and
knocked him on his butt. And the policeman said,
don't do that, you're a policeman, you're a
policeman. I said, get the hell out of here, I'm his
father. And anyway, he secured a scar with him the
rest of his life up there, but he remembered that it
was wrong. But that wasn't funny, though. It was
just a sad thing. And police business is not a fun
thing. I admire people. Like Elmer Snyder, they
got a jewel there. Did anybody ever try to twist the
arm of the campus police to get you to do something?
Well, I was working. A lot of times I'd help them out
at the front when we had these massive crowds. And
there was one of these, I don't even know what
country he was from. He was not U.S. But he comes in
once one of those, parking lots where you have a
number. I said, you can't have one. Well, what do
they cost? And I said, it doesn't matter what they
cost, you can't have one. And he pulled out his
billfold and started putting $100, how much are
they? $100 bills down. And I said, hold on a second.
I pulled out my badge and I said, now what was it you
were saying? Because I'd arrested him then, but I
didn't want to do it at that time. And he said, well,
I'll just have to look somewhere else. So he left.
But that actually happened. Did any regent or
former student or legislator ever tell you? Oh,
not the big guys. The regents were nice people. Of
course, we always took care of them, too, in the
boardroom when they had that number one plaque.
But people were always trying to get you to take
care of their tickets or the car was towed or one
thing or another. The only thing I told him, I said,
my son's gotten a couple of tickets, and he paid
them. I didn't ultimately pay them, but my wife got
two or three, and she paid them. And that's the only
way you can operate. You just can't do anything
else. Did you ever get any calls from somebody
trying to get you to let their son go? Well, I guess,
let's see, Gus Majalis, Gus's son was a student
here, and it was a petty thing, but he picked up a
passbook, I guess a student book with football
tickets in it, and didn't turn it in. And it was
pretty easy to find out who it belonged to. It was in
the reserve section over there, and they found
him, and we were taken down to JP like everybody
else. We didn't get to the JP. It was taken care of
before we got there. But I didn't know that they had
a direct line through Maddox. Mm. Maddox was the
land where the athletic department. Mm. And, you
know, we, I, every coach I went to, and I said, if
Fort Lauderdale football coaches, players are
the same as any other student, and we're going to
treat them the same. It didn't happen that way. And
before we tried to, before we got to J.P. with them,
it was taken care of, and Maddox was telling them
about it. And, I mean, I hope it didn't happen to
now. I don't think it is. When the old board house
burned, how did you hear about that fire? Well,
they called me at home. Do you remember who called?
Oh, the police. I was the policeman. They called
me, and I jumped in the truck and headed out. And it
was, you know, of course, still burning when I got
here. And thank goodness no one was injured, were
they? No, no. You know, the college station pilot
was probably one of the best. And, of course, that
thing was fully engulfed, too. By the time I got
there, I don't know what all happened. I know that,
of course, I saw Dr. Miller's room, and they were
very distraught, and, you know, just terrible
life for them. And Dr. Miller served until 1980.
Dr. Vandiver, yeah. And then Dr. Vandiver... What
was it like reporting to him? Well, I never had much
direct conversation with him, but I disagreed
with him. You know, he wanted some guns, pistol.
And the police get a special price, and they wanted
the police price, and I told them no. I told the
chief that, well, he got his guns, and he turned
them in after all the trouble, and he came up and
told them, well, here's your damn guns. But the
money that was paid for them came from former
students. He wanted somebody to, he wanted a
police radio in his car, which I guess was all
right. The only thing is he used it for a lot more
than that, to call my wife and tell her to do so and
so, and that sort of stuff, which is kind of gauzy.
Little things like that were, I guess he somehow
admired police people, and he used to, McDonald
used to take him out to the range and he'd shoot his
pistol out there and that sort of stuff. He was
having some problems with her former husband, and
I walked around his house several nights, two or
three hours, looking for suspicious characters
that were out there. We'd get phone calls that
somebody was running across that path. That was a
jogging path. But nevertheless, we'd go out
there, and I went out to a little theft place that's
over there, and wandered around for three hours,
never saw anything. But, and we were getting those
same phone calls, threatening calls. And during
all of your years, we never had a serious theft
problem here on the campus, did we? Not there. As
far as you knew, How did A&M as a campus, in terms of
law enforcement, how did it compare with, in crime
rate, compared to other universities? Well, the
larger universities like UT and University of
Houston and so forth, we knew pretty much about
them because we all were having an association.
They didn't have traffic. They were police. And
they were totally different problems. These
smaller universities were combined. A&M was just
too big for that type of operation. So we couldn't
compare with them. And you can't compare with the
quality. You train them and somebody else will
hire them because they don't like it. And I mean, it
costs a lot to train these guys and put them in the
uniform. And by the time you get them in the
uniform, you've already spent several thousand
dollars. And then they're very employable
because they're the high turnover of police
people. Brian College Station hired a bunch of our
people. And generally, where did our university
police, what was their background? Where did they
come from? Well,
young guys out looking for a job. Most of them were
not college people. And were they professionally
trained police? Well, no, we got very few that were
already certified. We had to send them to school.
And then quite often they got hired away by some of
them. Most of the time. By the time you invest in
uniforms for them and training and everything,
because we didn't pay them as much when they were in
school as we did when they were certified. And as
soon as they were certified, the same way that
Brian in college, they'd yank them off for $1,000
more or something like that. You can't blame the
guys, but that's what happened. So I gather in
comparison of the two tasks you had here, being
commandant was more satisfying. Oh, it was a fun
job. And more enjoyable. And so you left the second
task in 1980. 83. 83.
And you left at a time when you decided. Yes, I
volunteered. Although, frankly, I could see the
handwriting on the wall because I think they were
ready for a change over there and a couple of should
have been made. I made a mistake, like I said
before. I should not have put Russell McDonald in
the job, and I should have moved him out of there,
and I didn't. All right. As yesterday, if you were
offering advice to people today about what the
commandant should do, what advice would you give
them? Well, it looks to me like he's got the best of
both worlds now. He's got financial aid, and that
was a big problem. And he's got a staff that makes me
very envious. They're all good people. They're
all falling over 98% Aggie, maybe 100. And they all
are military oriented. And the ROTC business,
they've got it great, too. All they've got to worry
about is their class. So I think his biggest
problem is recruiting and retention. And with the
scholarship program and the shortage of space and
everything, I think recruiting must not be too
difficult. And would you always have the
Commandant be a former Aggie student? I would like
for him to be, if I had any choice. What about branch
of service? Doesn't matter. Doesn't matter? The
Commandant's supposed to be not prejudiced. You
can help with a little service bias, but I don't
think it matters. General Darling, I thought he
did a great job. And General Hopgood, he's been
very good to me. About how long would you have the
commandant serve? I think five or six years is
enough. Just like presidents of universities,
there's a time when you get pretty stale in the job.
It's really the same thing over and over and over.
More so in the corps probably than in the academia.
What about advising about police and that task?
What advice would you give there to the decision
makers? Oh, I wouldn't be, I'm not near as
professional in the policemen as Bob Wildman.
Elmer Snyder is my closest friend here now, and I
spent a lot of time with him, and Elmer, he really
works hard at that job, and Bob, I like Bob a lot, but
I wish he'd retire. It's time for him to retire,
because Elmer's doing the job, and it wouldn't
matter, he'll still do the job either way, but But
they've got a fantastic organization, and those
guys have got to have at least two years of college.
And they're not friendly. When you see them on the
campus, they don't speak or anything like that,
which I think is kind of wrong, because you don't
need to walk around like I'm a policeman. Don't
mess with me. And I see that. And I noticed it myself
just this morning. I spoke to a couple of them and
got ignored. But I speak to a lot of the people I
didn't get ignored to. And like you were telling
me, I've been noticing the girls, they smile and
speak to you. And that makes me feel good. Looking
over those years and both tasks, what were your
happiest, proudest moments? Well, one of them was
this thing right here. which I see you're wearing,
too. And I know that... As a note to the machine, he
pointed to the watch for the Distinguished
Service Award, and in his case was for University
Service. It's really Student Relations. Student
Relations Award, yes. There's one a year. And I
know that there were people that objected to a
military force from getting it. And I didn't even
know who some of them were, which is fine. I was
surprised and everything else. But I was very
proud of the guys in the student body that I know who
were behind my getting this thing. And they're
pretty influential people in Washington right
now, as you know who one of them is. But it really was
an unexpected thing. And also, it will never
happen again to an active duty military officer
because you've got to have five years of the
university. And I don't think that's going to ever
happen again. So I had the longest tenure of any
military active duty person. Other proud
moments, happy moments? Well, the Carroll time,
of course, was a very proud moment for me. I was very
proud when, I guess, when Judy graduated. She had
never been to college, never hoped to go. She was
scared to death. I told her when I went to work for
the University Police, I said, okay, I haven't had
time to do anything else and I want you to go to
college. And I carried her around to some of the
profs And they said, you can do it. Don't worry.
Well, I don't remember much and whatever, but
anyway, she just needed it. Now, this is your
daughter? No, I'm the only person you know who's
been married three times and never divorced. Oh,
oh, oh. My second wife. Oh, oh, that's right.
That's right. I'm sorry. Yes, yes. And Judy, she
graduated cum laude in industrial ed. And I was
very proud of that.
At the same time, we still had three boys at home,
too, and I don't know how she did it. Of course, I was
proud when my son graduated, and when I married
again, I was very proud. Carlos, he'll be there
tonight, and he's an Aggie all the way through. I'm
very proud of what he's going to do now and be a
nurse. I think that's a good application. And of
course this thing here was a... The petition, yes.
That was a very moving thing for me. Of all the
presidents that you observed, to which ones would
you give the highest Well, of course, Dr. Williams
is the one that I knew the most and really knew him
well, as well as you can know him in that
relationship, not in a personal relationship.
But I didn't have much personal dealings with Dr.
Miller or Dr. Vander, but Dr. Williams almost on a
daily basis. And are there some If you were writing
a list of people to whom you feel deepest gratitude
connected with A&M, who would that be? Well, of
course, Buck, not around anymore, Buck Wirus.
Buck Wirus, oh. And because he was very supportive
of me and the Corps. And again, Dr. Williams and
John DeColtis were supportive. And, you know, all
over the campus, most of the faculty were very,
very supportive. I'm sure there were some that
didn't like it. I know they hated like hell having
us on the faculty council or whatever it is. Heck,
we didn't want to be there anyway. But we felt like
we better be there because voting on things, I
didn't know what they were talking about. There's
just so many good things that happened in the
world. It's hard to say. All right, now I've run out
of questions. What else have we not covered from?
Yes, I don't know. I think we've covered about
everything I can think of. Well, let's end then
with what do you think about A&M's future? Well, it
looks awfully bright to me, I think,
educationally. And what I'm glad of is that the
students haven't changed. They're the same good
people. And the campus is so different from any
other place I've ever been. I haven't spent much
time on university campuses, but I did spend two
years at Boston College. And there's no
difference from those people back then, even. But
I think we're just going to be We're going to stay on
the top. We may not be a Harvard or a Yale, but I'd
rather be from here than Harvard or Yale. I don't
think our education is any less than what they get.
They just get a better name, maybe. But I do want it
to not grow much bigger, though. That's a good
thing.